# Rhymes of Power

In this project, I present you an interactive text-based artwork made in processing and hosted on web. The artwork revolves around understanding the role the songs play in women empowerment. In instance, where one may be silenced, it is the music that gives us a voice. It has a power to make us stronger - either through poetic lyrics , contagious rhythms or combination of both. As early as one could imagine, music has enabled people to connect to each other, to community and especially to themselves in a much better way than anticipated. For centuries, women have used music as a way to outlet their struggles in daily lives. With many strong and inspirational women spreading hope and courage through art, especially music, there are still many struggles that still remain unshaken. But feminism continue to thrive. Music therapy can be used as a tool for sparking women’s empowerment and helping individuals take hold of their past, present, and future.

There are so many great feminist songs by women artists that celebrate feminine brains, brawn, and beauty. Some extol the virtues of self-love, while others tackle complicated political questions related to the challenge of gender. Some are just bops about getting dressed.Oftentimes, we do not want to talk about what troubles us, which is why music therapy’s nonverbal elements are very successful. Music acts as an outlet for trauma and recovery, while at the same time regenerating self-worth in those who may have lost it along the way. In this project, though limited scope due to technical limitations (discussed later), I worked with the Top 5 Feminist songs as per Glamour rankings and created an abstract artwork on processing to try to understand if the songs, broken down to their core elements - words, are actually giving out the messages as intended or not. 

To achieve this, I first used BeautifulSoup to parse the web pages and extract the lyrics. After storing them as text, I further processed them to be able to use them for artwork. This involved removing all the html tags, whitespaces, punctuation,letters and conversion to lower case letters.This was achieved by the nltk and re python libraries. To further process the data, I tokenized all the lyrics. To have much cleaner data, I removed all the words with length shorter than three and also removed all the stop words. Stop words are the most common words that include articles and others like “the”, “all”, “a”, “on”, etc. To avoid the duplication of the data, I created a copy list for each song that had only one occurrence of each word. These lists were then transferred to Processing manually to allow less data dependency. The code for this whole scrapping and the pre-processing of the text can be found on this Colab link:
https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1RZsJyFpXXs2vnhrOSniwDguyyQTp-QEo?usp=sharing

In Processing, I use the tokenized list for each song and display the different words present in the song with random position and color on the screen. The background color was kept dark to make the different colors stand out in the crowd and allow better aesthetics in general. To add interactivity and make the artwork more artistic and user controllable, the user has the option on the screen to choose from the five songs. The multicolored rectangles under a white dialogue box in the screen allow the user to click and choose which song they want to choose to display the words. With songs presented one at a time, the viewer gets the opportunity to clearly identify the common words/ themes in the song and evaluate or consider the song accordingly. The randomization of the words really adds to great aesthetics combining text and art.  

Originally, I planned to do many more songs but the processing application was unable to handle that large amount of data. Also, with the intention to present the processing sketch as the webpage, it made things much more harder where you can not use import statements and alot asset dependencies. I tried to research a lot into this process, but with the time constraints, it was not an easy task to figure out entirely. At present time, the sketch and html page work perfectly fine and with some glitches respectively on a local machine but the github hosting fails. After numerous attempts, I am now finally deeply saddened but acknowledge that I am unable to figure this out. This project has been very engaging, fun and thought provoking artistically. This allowed me to directly engage with a lot of forums and learn new things. Although I am disappointed about the unfinished outcome, I had a great learning experience that I am proud of. 

Find the processing code attached, that could be downloaded and viewed locally until I am able to figure out the webpage situation.
